FINAL CAPSTONE PROJECT DESCRIPTION

TEAM MEMBERS-

Name-Ashmit Thakur || Uid-23BAI70503
Name-Jahnvi || Uid-23Bai70330


Real-Time Feature Flag Management System (MERN + Redis)
Dynamic Runtime Feature Control and Rollout Management Console
1. Project Overview

The Feature Flag Management System is a real-time, MERN-based control platform that allows developers and operators to dynamically enable, disable, or target application features without redeploying or restarting the application.

It is divided into three main components:

Admin UI (admin-ui/) – A React-based dashboard for flag creation, editing, and rollout simulation.

Backend API (backendd/) – A Node.js (Express) service connected to MongoDB and Redis for real-time flag management and evaluation.

Testing Client (testing-app/) – A sample React application integrated with a lightweight SDK to demonstrate real-time flag consumption and dynamic updates.

This project implements feature flagging as a service, integrating Redis Pub/Sub for instant flag propagation, MongoDB for persistent storage, and Express APIs for flag evaluation and configuration.

The system is designed for progressive delivery, A/B testing, and continuous deployment environments, allowing developers to ship features confidently and toggle them instantly in production.

2. Objectives

To create a real-time feature flag management system using MERN + Redis.

To toggle and target features dynamically based on environment or user attributes.

To ensure low-latency evaluation of feature flags using Redis caching and Pub/Sub messaging.

To provide a React-based admin console for flag management and live monitoring.

To implement a safe and observable flag evaluation SDK for client-side and backend consumers.

3. System Architecture

The project follows a modular three-tier design:

🗄️ Backend (Node.js + Express + MongoDB + Redis)

Acts as the core API and flag evaluation engine.

Stores flag definitions in MongoDB (Flag.js model).

Uses Redis (redisClient.js) for caching hot flags and Pub/Sub for notifying connected clients about flag changes.

Exposes REST endpoints (flags.js, evaluate.js) for CRUD operations and real-time evaluation.

Includes a realtime.js module that handles synchronization events and subscription channels.

🖥️ Admin UI (React)

Located in admin-ui/src/.

Provides an intuitive interface to:

Create, edit, and archive flags (FlagForm.js).

View all existing flags, their status, and metadata (AdminPanel.js).

Communicates with the backend using REST APIs to manage feature definitions.

Uses Axios and React Hooks for data handling and real-time updates.

Provides toggles and input forms for feature configuration.

⚙️ Testing App + SDK

A separate sandbox located in testing-app/ that demonstrates how real applications consume feature flags.

The folder testing-app/src/feature-flag-sdk/ includes:

index.js – SDK logic to call the backend evaluation API and determine flag states using isEnabled(flag, context).

Built to be easily integrated with any React or Node.js client for testing feature gating.

The main component DemoApp.js demonstrates toggling live features based on flag evaluation results.

4. Key Features
 1. Flag Models and Metadata

Each flag (defined in Flag.js) includes:

name, key, description, type, and status.

Lifecycle states: draft, active, archived.

Metadata like owner, tags, and creation date.

 2. Targeting Rules

Supports environment-based targeting (e.g., dev, staging, prod).

Percentage-based rollouts for controlled experiments.

User-based context evaluation via SDK (region, plan, role).

Deterministic hashing to ensure consistent rollout allocation.

 3. Real-Time Updates (Redis Pub/Sub)

When a flag is created or updated, the backend:

Saves the new state to MongoDB.

Updates Redis cache with the new flag.

Publishes an event using Redis Pub/Sub channels.

Connected clients or SDK instances subscribed to the Redis channel receive updates instantly.

 4. Evaluation API

Implemented in backendd/src/routes/evaluate.js.

Receives a context object and returns the evaluated result of a flag:

POST /api/evaluate
{
  "flagKey": "new-feature",
  "context": { "userId": 123, "plan": "premium" }
}


Response:

{ "isEnabled": true }


Evaluator logic ensures deterministic behavior and safe fallback when Redis is unavailable.

 5. Admin UI (React Dashboard)

AdminPanel.js – Displays all flags with current status.

FlagForm.js – Interface to create or edit a flag’s metadata and targeting rules.

Implements real-time UI updates upon backend changes.

Responsive design with clear input validation and confirmation dialogs.

 6. Testing SDK

Found under testing-app/src/feature-flag-sdk/.

Provides helper methods to fetch, cache, and evaluate flags locally.

Supports periodic refresh and instant update through Redis Pub/Sub or API polling.

Allows easy embedding in any frontend or backend service.

5. Data Flow
 End-to-End Flow

Admin creates or updates a flag from the React dashboard.

Backend (flags.js) saves the flag to MongoDB and publishes changes via Redis.

Redis broadcasts the update to all subscribers (applications or SDKs).

Client SDK receives the update and updates its in-memory flag state.

When an app calls isEnabled(flag, context), the SDK evaluates conditions deterministically and returns a consistent boolean result.

This flow ensures instant rollout and rollback of features across distributed environments.

6. Folder-by-Folder Explanation
 backendd/

index.js – Entry point for Express backend. Initializes MongoDB and Redis connections.

src/config/db.js – MongoDB configuration and connection handling.

src/models/Flag.js – Mongoose schema defining flag structure and lifecycle states.

src/routes/flags.js – Routes for CRUD operations (create, update, delete, list).

src/routes/evaluate.js – Evaluation API for clients.

src/services/redisClient.js – Redis client setup, Pub/Sub handling.

src/realtime.js – Listens to Redis channels for real-time updates and broadcasts changes.

 admin-ui/

src/components/AdminPanel.js – Main dashboard to view all existing flags.

src/components/FlagForm.js – Form interface for flag creation and updates.

App.js – Routes between dashboard and flag management pages.

index.js / index.css – Entry points for React rendering and styling.

 testing-app/

src/DemoApp.js – Demonstrates flag-based UI rendering.

src/feature-flag-sdk/index.js – Core SDK logic for flag evaluation and API interaction.

package.json – SDK dependencies and configuration for modular reuse.

7. Technologies Used
Layer	Technology	Purpose
Frontend	React.js	Admin UI and Testing App
Backend	Node.js + Express	API & flag evaluation logic
Database	MongoDB	Persistent flag storage
Cache Layer	Redis	Low-latency flag reads + Pub/Sub updates
SDK	JavaScript	Client-side evaluation
Security	dotenv, CORS, JWT (future scope)	Secure access control
Tooling	Docker / npm	Environment management & packaging
8. Current Status
Feature	Implementation
Boolean flags	✅ Implemented
Multivariate flags	🔄 Planned
Percentage rollout	✅ Implemented
Redis Pub/Sub	✅ Implemented
Audit logging	🔄 Partially implemented
JWT Authentication	🔄 Planned
Role-based access	🔄 Planned
Flag evaluation API	✅ Fully implemented
SDK for client apps	✅ Implemented
Docker Compose	🔄 Optional setup in progress
9. Advantages

Enables real-time feature control without redeploying applications.

Supports gradual rollout and instant rollback.

Provides a unified platform for developers and operations teams.

Redis Pub/Sub ensures synchronized state across instances.

Modular, scalable, and extensible architecture.

Facilitates A/B testing and experimentation in production.

10. Future Enhancements

Implement multivariate flag types (string, JSON, variant-based).

Add audit trail UI for monitoring changes and user actions.

Integrate JWT authentication and user roles in Admin UI.

Add metrics visualization (cache hit rate, evaluation latency).

Provide Docker Compose setup for easy local deployment.

Build CI/CD integration for automated rollout testing.

11. Conclusion

The Feature Flag Management System successfully demonstrates how to design and implement a real-time configuration control platform using MERN and Redis.

It bridges the gap between development and deployment by allowing teams to:

Test features safely in production,

Deliver progressively, and

Maintain system stability even under continuous release conditions.

The modular separation into backendd, admin-ui, and testing-app showcases clear software design, scalability, and maintainability principles — making this project a strong practical example of cloud-ready feature flag management.